[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and tanaka manchetti our
headlines today
a ban on travellers to the uk from south
america and portugal
has come into force because of fears of
a new variant of coronavirus
good morning the uk economy shrunk by
2.6
in november as new restrictions took
hold but the
shrinking wasn't as bad as many had
expected
as firms learned new ways to cope
celebrities including the footballer
marcus rashford joined campaigners to
call for an urgent review of the
government's free school meals policy
good morning a century for england's
captain joe root leads by example with
his ton against sri lanka
as england build a healthy lead in the
first testing goal
why bez from the happy mondays is
launching online exercise
classes in his own style apparently he
piled on some pounds
during lockdown
and you might need those exercises to
warm up today minus 11 at the moment in
parts of north yorkshire at least
yesterday snow's gone for now but
there's more to come tonight i'll have
the full forecast here on breakfast
[Music]
good morning it's friday the 15th of
january our top story this morning a ban
on travelers from south america coming
to the uk has just come into force the
measure has been introduced because of
fears about a new
variant of coronavirus that has been
identified in brazil
the ban will also affect portugal and
cape verde because of their strong links
to the country
our political correspondent ian watson
joins us now from westminster
ian morning to you so we were talking to
grant chaps getting some clarity
um a little earlier from the government
because this came in
um this morning at four o'clock and then
um monday is when
other rules or the actual
implementation of it comes into effect
well that's right on monday
from wherever you're coming from you're
going to need a negative
a coronavirus test a high quality
coronavirus test
before you can get access to the uk
but ahead of that the government has
acted because of concerns over the
new variant of the virus in brazil so
that means
a flight ban from uh certainly not for
returning uk residents but for everyone
else
from most of south america and also from
portugal where of course
people can fly indirectly from brazil uh
via lisbon
that's taking place now but concerns
were raised but this
variant last weekend so grant shaps the
transport secretary was asked on the
program
uh why it taken so long we had a look at
this particular mutation as opposed to
the many other thousands
uh very carefully um saw that there
may be an issue not so much that the
vaccine won't work
in fact scientists think that it will
work but just the fact that it's more
spreadable
as with the version that we've got here
and wanted to
act as quickly as possible as it happens
uh there aren't there haven't been
flights coming from brazil in the last
week
so grant sharp saying no flights
directly from brazil in any case and
after the prime minister expressed
concerns on wednesday he announced
that there would be a ban on thursday so
the government maintainer did act
quickly there but there's also another
concern uh which people are worried
about as i was saying there's going to
be tests required for people coming into
this country
but also france which is imposing a 6
p.m curfew
are now saying that there ought to be
the most sophisticated type of
coronavirus test
for travelers going there the so-called
pcr tests which take
longer uh to to get the results now
grant chaps was maintaining that
hollyers would be exempt from this that
they would get the quicker lateral flow
tests these only take about 30 minutes
to get
a result but he was saying that's a
system in place for the time
being he also said the french would be
in the uk on monday to see how the
system
was working and there's certainly
concerns in the road haulage industry
that much more the much more
sophisticated the older test the pcr
test
may be required in the future and if so
that delays at the ports
could grow ian thanks so much ian what's
in there for us
lockdown restrictions in november pushed
the uk economy
back into decline a key measure of
economic growth shows the closure of
non-essential shops in england had a big
impact on the whole economy
we can go to bed now he's on oxford
street uh for us this morning so ben
you've got
quite a lot of numbers to give us in a
moment i suppose in a way look at oxford
street
i mean it's a sign in itself of uh very
much
the damage that's been done to the uk
economy
yeah you're absolutely right and the
reason we're here is that retail is such
a big part of our economy
and it's like hospitality and many other
businesses has been forced to close only
essential retailers can stay open
and what we've had this morning is an
update on the economic picture
for november and remember that was the
month when the
uh when england began its second
national lockdown there were similar
restrictions in scotland and wales at
the same time and so because those
businesses were shut
we learned this morning that the economy
shrunk by 2.6
in november now it wasn't as bad as many
had feared and it wasn't as bad as the
restrictions and the impact
of that first lockdown and that's
because these figures tell us that
business was more adaptable it learned
how to deal with those restrictions
so it was able to operate in many
respects as normal for some businesses
particularly things like
manufacturing and construction and even
those service business
like hospitality and retail they were
able to offer things like click and
collect services or
home delivery kits and that meant that
they could produce some economic
output despite the lockdown restrictions
that were in force
but nonetheless i think what this does
raise is the prospect of a double dip
recession the idea that we were in
recession
in the start of last year then the
economy bounced back again it managed to
grow again over the summer as
some of those restrictions were eased
but as further restrictions were brought
in in november and then again at
christmas and now
in this third national lockdown there is
a potential for us to be in
a double-dip recession the idea that the
economy is tipped back
into a recession once again we've had an
update from the chancellor this morning
in a statement responding to these gdp
figures telling us that
yes it is clear that things will get
worse before they get better and so the
economy's shrinking by 2.6
in november the economy is still nearly
eight and a half percent smaller than it
was before all of this began
began and as we heard from the
chancellor this morning saying things
could get worse
before they get better but these figures
not as bad
as many had feared yeah gotta take some
solace from them haven't we ben
um thanks so much good to see you
now celebrity chefs charities and
campaigners including the football and
marcus rashford
have called for an urgent review of the
three school meals policy in the uk
now in a letter to the prime minister
they call for a strategy to help
end food poverty amongst children john
donaldson has more
the campaign over free school meals led
by marcus rashford
has already forced the government into
several changes of direction
ministers have been accused of coming up
with temporary short-term measures
to deal with a long-term problem now a
number of celebrities including jamie
oliver
and emma thompson have joined the
footballer and over 40 charities
and educational leaders to write to the
government
to call for change we've signed the
letter because the last few months have
really shown
up the cracks in our school food system
whether it's the use of food parcels
or vouchers or giving people cash during
lockdown or whether indeed to feed
children during school holidays
and also most importantly making sure
that every
child who lives in poverty is able to
access support
the letter calls for the government to
conduct an urgent
comprehensive review into free school
meal policy
across the uk and to provide
recommendations
for the next spending review this week
boris johnson condemned as
inadequate a number of meal parcels
after images of them were shared on
social media
but the government insists it's
committed to making sure no
child goes hungry as a result of the
pandemic
it's schools choices how they deliver
this support
and the schools of the contracts with
their caterers
we've given them the choice between
doing a parcel
which has to produce the food for the
five days for the child
or a local voucher or a national voucher
on top of that we've done masses and
masses more we've put in this covert
winter support fund
which is another 170 million that
supported children young people their
families all through christmas with
parcels and food packages
downing street says the prime minister
will respond to the letter soon
john donaldson bbc news
more than 150 000 fingerprint dna and
arrest history records have been
accidentally deleted from a national
police database following a technical
issue
the home office says the data doesn't
relate to convicted or dangerous
criminals but it's
thought the error may hinder further
investigations labor has called for the
home secretary pretty patel to make a
statement
at least seven people have been killed
by a powerful earthquake which rocked
the indonesian island of sulawesi
the magnitude 6.2 quake flattened
buildings
rescuers are trying to reach people in
the rubble of a collapsed hospital
where more than a dozen patients and
staff are reported to be trapped
the u.s president-elect joe biden has
announced a 1.9 billion dollar spending
package to combat chronovirus pandemic
and support the struggling american
economy speaking in delaware mr biden
called the vaccination program
a dismal failure and reiterated his
pledge to deliver 100 million jabs
in his first 100 days of office he is
also promised an extension for
unemployment benefits to millions
of americans
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news